\title{Open Weights are a Fundamentally Unsustainable Business Model}
\author{Pranav Balakrishnan}
\date{Aug 4, 2026}
\excerpt{Models aren’t anything like open-source software.}

Open-weights AI models are often compared to open-source software. I don’t really think this is a good comparison; in fact it’s likely that open weights \textit{slow} the pace of SOTA model development, instead of accelerating it.

There are many good arguments in favor of open-source software. Some of our greatest software projects were open-sourced, like Linux, Git, and Postgres. These projects have had many thousands of individual contributors, which is why they were able to grow quickly.

Fundamentally, people contribute to open-source software because they’re interested in it, not because they want to make money. This makes sense for software, because it has remarkably low development costs. Anyone can download an IDE for free and push a contribution to an open-source Github repository if they have some free time.

Sometimes there are ways to make money through open-source software. I think the best example of this is Databricks. Databricks is built on top of Apache Spark, an open-source data analytics platform created in 2009. Some of the creators of Apache Spark founded Databricks in 2013, which essentially was a cloud platform built on Apache Spark.

Since Apache Spark was open-source and free, it was quickly widely adopted. Databricks presented an easier way to run Apache Spark, and since many people already used it, they were eager to switch. Today, Databricks is worth just under \$200B.

\section{Why Open Weights are Different}

The world is built on economic incentives. Open-source software works because the cost of contributing to open-source software is very low, and people directly benefit themselves from improving open-source software. Open-weights models aren’t like that—the cost of making SOTA AI models better is actually quite high.

Getting lots of high-quality data is the primary way that labs make their models better, which they pay a lot for. While an individual person could theoretically produce some data that makes a model better, and contribute it to an open-source dataset, these contributions improve the model so marginally that people don’t have much incentive to contribute in this way. While with open-source software, you might write a feature because you find that feature useful, but you can’t contribute to AI models like this.

The other way entities could contribute to an open-source model is by getting a lot of data, training the model, and re-uploading the weights. This process is very expensive, both in data acquisition and in the cost of compute for training, so only very well-capitalized companies could actually do it effectively. It doesn’t make economic sense for a company to do this, because they’d basically be acting as a charity.

Closed-weights AI labs run two businesses: training (producing a model), and inference + producing harnesses (running the model and producing products like Claude Code, Codex, and the ChatGPT interface). Today, customers pay these labs for the second business, to use their models through their harnesses.

Making model weights public means that the lab must “give away” their model for free. They’ve paid for training, and everyone else gets to access the product of that process without paying for it. This makes sense sometimes with open-source software, like in Databricks’ case, because widespread adoption of the underlying open-source technology makes people more likely to pay for a service.

This isn’t the case with AI models, however, because LLMs are increasingly interchangeable and general-purpose. OpenAI can’t really offer significantly better surrounding products to go with ChatGPT, since it’s very easy for another company to offer similar or better products, especially given the fact that AI makes building software so much easier.

The lab can’t competitively offer inference, since every other cloud provider can also offer equally good inference. The harness business is already very competitive today, and open-sourcing the weights makes it even easier to make high-quality harnesses.

The cost of creating the model outweighs the benefit that the lab gains from producing it, if the weights are open-source.
