\author{Pranav Balakrishnan}
\date{}

Westwood, Cornell

pranavbalakrishnandebate@gmail.com

Debate is math. I will be very technical, and you should focus on minimizing technical mistakes. Nearly all of my opinions are inferred from the text of the resolution and the premise that every debater wants to win.

I have a lot of respect for debaters that work hard for the activity, and very little respect for judges that act as if they don't care, refuse to flow, or otherwise put little effort into judging. I promise that I'll do my best to make the correct decision, as that's what I felt I deserved when I debated.

Above all, I am best for teams that are technical, but do personally appreciate high-quality (and well-formatted) evidence, deliberate and precise wording, and judging debaters that have clearly thought a lot about the details of their arguments.

I am not an expert on anything. I have no rational basis to intervene based on what I feel is correct because I'm really not sure whether my opinions are right in the first place. Therefore, I'll try my best not to let any of the claims below distort my imperative to be technical.

\begin{enumerate}
  \item Policy teams are much too tame on the neg. Being granted the power of virtually unlimited opportunity cost is powerful and underutilized. I am very good for somewhat heinous strategies that might involve dozens of planks, a constitutional convention, or a separation of powers crisis.
  \item `Try-or-die' is very important. It is implicitly assumed when both sides advocate existential scenarios, since they mutually agree that extinction should be avoided.
  \item I believe in functional competition and `plan in a vacuum.' Overall, I'm very receptive to creative and innovative theory, competition, topicality, and framework strategies.
  \item When debating a critique, policy teams should go for a framework interpretation which is based in the resolution and justified by a fairness impact. Clash impacts are great, but can make it difficult to go for `ballot key' arguments. I've often found that the team that wins that the ballot is key to their offense wins the debate.
\end{enumerate}
